Set project and meson options in cross/native files (#6597)
mesonbuild/meson: docs/markdown/Machine-files.md

one or the other see the [cross compilation](Cross-compilation.md) and [native
environments](Native-environments.md).

## Data Types

There are three basic data types in a machine file:
- strings
- arrays
- booleans

A string is specified single quoted:
```ini
[section]
option = 'value'
```

> An array is enclosed in square brackets, and must consist of strings or booleans

Reviewer: Do we also support implicitly defining an array with a single element using string syntax like we do for the `[binaries]` section? I have a slight preference for not doing that if we do, but if we decide to support that it should be documented.

Reviewer 2: It's not done in the machine file, but probably a stringlistify() somewhere when it gets the value of binaries. Array options works like that too, `c_args='-DFOO'` works.

one or the other see the [cross compilation](Cross-compilation.md) and [native
environments](Native-environments.md).

## Data Types

There are three basic data types in a machine file:
- strings
- arrays
- booleans

> - integers

Reviewer 2: There are three hard problems in programming:
- naming things
- off by one error

A string is specified single quoted:
```ini
[section]
option1 = 'false'
option2 = '2'
```

An array is enclosed in square brackets, and must consist of strings or booleans
```ini
[section]
option = ['value']
```

A boolean must be either `true` or `false`, and unquoted.
```ini
option = false
```

> An integer must be either an unquoted numeric constant;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An integer must be an unquoted numeric constant.
```

Reviewer 3: Still not fixed tho :P

> An integer must be either an unquoted numeric constant;

Reviewer 2: 'either' here implies there is another syntax possible, but there is none, right?

Author: that's just a copy and paste error :)

```ini
option = 42
```

## Sections

The following sections are allowed:
- binaries
- paths
- properties
- project options
- built-in options

### Binaries

The binaries section contains a list of binaries. These can be used

> internally by meson, or by the `find_program` function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
internally by meson or by the `find_program` function.
```

internally by meson, or by the `find_program` function.

These values must be either strings or an array of strings

Compilers and linkers are defined here using `<lang>` and `<lang>_ld`.
`<lang>_ld` is special because it is compiler specific. For compilers like
gcc and clang which are used to invoke the linker this is a value to pass to
their "choose the linker" argument (-fuse-ld= in this case). For compilers
like MSVC and Clang-Cl, this is the path to a linker for meson to invoke,

> such as `link.exe` or `lld-link.exe`. Support for ls is *new in 0.53.0*

Reviewer 3: So support for `ls` was deprecated? Darn! :P

Cross example:

```ini
c = ['ccache', '/usr/bin/i586-mingw32msvc-gcc']

> cpp = ['ccache', '/usr/bin/i586-mingw32msvc-g++']

Reviewer 2: Not sure we want to change this example, a simple string works and IIRC there is an open issue somewhere to prepend ccache automatically when available.

Author: The point was that a list is also accepted, as it came up recently that you can pass these as lists not just as strings, and using ccache was a reasonable example. If you've got a different example using a list I'll change it.

In addition to special data that may be specified in cross files, this
section may contain random key value pairs accessed using the
`meson.get_external_property`, or `meson.get_cross_property`.

### Project specific options

*New in 0.55.0*

> Path options are not allowed, those must be set in the `[paths]` section.

Reviewer 2: Or rather we could deprecate the `[paths]` section and have them into the built-in options section? I personally don't like imposing to the user arbitrary split of options. Sounds like imposing an implementation detail into our API.

Reviewer 3: This line needs to be edited, since it contradicts the line above:
```
### Paths and Directories
*Deprecated in 0.55.0* use the built-in section instead.
```

Reviewer 2: Now that you did deprecate [paths] that line should be removed.

Being able to set project specific options in a cross or native file can be
done using the `[project options]` section of the specific file (if doing a
cross build the options from the native file will be ignored)

An incomplete list of options is:
- pkg_config_path
- cmake_prefix_path

For setting options in supbprojects use the `<subproject>:project options`
section instead.

```ini
[project options]

> build-tests = true

Reviewer 2: IIRC the cross file parser force to have quotes for all values, do you have a unit test that verify that actually works?

section may contain random key value pairs accessed using the
`meson.get_external_property()`

## Properties
### Project specific options

*New for native files in 0.54.0*
*New in 0.55.0*

The properties section can contain any variable you like, and is accessed via

> `meson.get_external_property`, or `meson.get_cross_property`.

Author: Oops, that looks like a bad rebase

> `meson.get_external_property`, or `meson.get_cross_property`.

Author: ah, I see what happened. This section was duplicated. I've split this change out into a separate commit.

cross build the options from the native file will be ignored)

An incomplete list of options is:
- pkg_config_path
- cmake_prefix_path

For setting options in supbprojects use the `<subproject>:project options`
section instead.

```ini
[project options]
build-tests = true

[zlib:project options]
build-tests = false
```

Meson built-in options can be set the same way:

```ini
[built-in options]
c_std = 'c99'
```

You can set some meson built-in options on a per-subproject basis.

The current list is:
- default_library

> - werror

Author: Command line, machine file, build system definitions; in that order. I've updated the docs.

### Paths and Directories

> As of 0.50.0 paths and directories such as libdir can be defined in the cross
> and native file in a paths section. These should be strings.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As of 0.50.0 paths and directories such as libdir can be defined in native
and cross files in a "paths" section. These should be strings.
```
I like native before cross, like build before host.

> 

Reviewer 3: Drive-by (for line 120):
```diff
- *New in native files in 0.54.0*, always in cross files.
+ *available in native files since 0.54.0*
+ *always available in cross files*
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Drive-by:

```diff
- *New in native files in 0.54.0*, always in cross files.
+ *available in native files since 0.54.0*
+ *always available in cross files*
```

In addition to special data that may be specified in cross files, this
section may contain random key value pairs accessed using the

> `meson.get_external_property`, or `meson.get_cross_property`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`meson.get_external_property()` or `meson.get_cross_property()`.
```

But, IMO, we shouldn't mention `meson.get_cross_property()` here at all, since we have `get_external_property()` which is superset of `get_cross_property()`

*Changed in 0.55.0* putting `<lang>_args` and `<lang>_link_args` in the
properties section has been deprecated, and should be put in the built-in
options section.

### Project specific options

*New in 0.55.0*

Path options are not allowed, those must be set in the `[paths]` section.

Being able to set project specific options in a cross or native file can be
done using the `[project options]` section of the specific file (if doing a
cross build the options from the native file will be ignored)

An incomplete list of options is:
- pkg_config_path

> - cmake_prefix_path

Reviewer 2: Those are not project options, they are built-in, right?

Author: That looks like something went wrong in a rebase, it's in the wrong section and the paragraph before it about separate host vs build options are missing.

> For setting options in supbprojects use the `<subproject>:project options`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For setting options in subprojects use the `<subproject>:project options`
```

> For setting options in supbprojects use the `<subproject>:project options`

Reviewer 2: nitpicking: I would add `[]` around it.

section instead.

```ini
[project options]
build-tests = true

[zlib:project options]
build-tests = false
```

### Meson built-in options

Meson built-in options can be set the same way:

```ini
[built-in options]
c_std = 'c99'
```

You can set some meson built-in options on a per-subproject basis, such as
`default_library` and `werror`. The order of precedence is:
1) Command line
2) Machine file

> 3) build system definitions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3) Build system definitions
```

> You can set some meson built-in options on a per-subproject basis, such as
> `default_library` and `werror`. The order of precedence is:
> 1) Command line
> 2) Machine file
> 3) build system definitions
> 
> ```ini
> [zlib:built-in options]
> default_library = 'static'
> werror = false
> ```
> 
> Options set on a per-subproject basis will inherit the
> option from the parent if the parent has a setting but the subproject
> doesn't, even when here is a default set meson language.
> 
> 
> ```ini
> [built-in options]
> default_library = 'static'
> ```
> 
> will make subprojects use default_library as static.

Reviewer 3: Edited for clarity:

``````suggestion
Note that the order of precedence is the following:
1) Command line
2) Machine file
3) Build system definitions

You can set some meson built-in options on a per-subproject basis, such as
`default_library` and `werror`:

```ini
[zlib:built-in options]
default_library = 'static'
werror = false
```

Per-subproject options use the same order of precedence as the root project options.
Subproject will also inherit options from the parent project if it was not specified
specifically for the subproject. For example the following:

```ini
[built-in options]
default_library = 'static'
```

will make subprojects use `default_library` as static.
``````

In addition to special data that may be specified in cross files, this
section may contain random key value pairs accessed using the

> `meson.get_external_property()`, or `meson.get_cross_property()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`meson.get_external_property()` or `meson.get_cross_property()`.
```
And my comment about unneeded `get_cross_property` still stand, so the following would be even better:
```suggestion
`meson.get_external_property()`.
```
